
Montage Release Change History

6.0   09Nov2018    The primary addition in Version 6.0 is the packaging of Montage
                   as a set of Python binary extensions (for Mac OS/X and Linux
                   platforms, Python versions 2.7 and 3.6).  This is very different
                   from previous Python interfaces to Montage which relied on the
                   user to pre-install Montage on their platform and then provided
                   access through wrappers.

                   This release is a true extension in that it is installs a binary
                   libraries that extend the Python executable itself.  No compilers
                   or other build infrastructure is needed, just a simple

                      pip install MontagePy

                   A few Montage modules have not been included but only because
                   we consider them of questionable utility at this time.  We can
                   certainly reconsider any of these that people find useful.


5.0   21Dec2016    Version 5.0 offers a new fast reprojection module, mProjectQL,
                   that is suitable for creating images for visualization; support
                   for FITS files containing data written in the HEALPix sky-
                   tesselation scheme; and support for creating images that can be
                   consumed by the World Wide Telescope (WWT). This release also 
                   allows the core modules to be built and used as a statically or 
                   dynamically linked library.The Montage library is built at the 
                   same time as the toolbox modules with the make command; no 
                   special build procedure is needed. A list of the library functions 
                   and the library API is here.


                     mProjectQL uses the Lanczos image interpolation scheme to provide 
                     higher performance in reprojection at the expense of conservation 
                     of flux; we recommend mProjectQL primarily for creating images 
                     for quick-look visualization rather than for science analysis. It 
                     offers a speed-up of approximately x20 over mProject.


                     Support for HEALPix: Montage treats HEALPix as if it were a spherical
                     projection that can processed with the existing reprojection routines
                     in Montage. It is managed through a local version of the WCStools library
                     users who prefer to use the SAO library should note that will lose 
                     HEALPix and TOAST support). The distribution includes a copy of the 
                     HPXcvt module to convert HEALPix data from FITS table form to FITS 
                     image form; this module is part of the WCSLib distribution at 
                     http://www.atnf.csiro.au/people/mcalabre/WCS/wcslib. (Copyright (C) 
                     1995-2016, Mark Calabretta).


                      Support for the WWT: As with HEALPix, Montage treats TOAST, the 
                      sky-tessellation scheme used by the WWT, as if they were a spherical 
                      projection that can processed with the existing reprojection routines 
                      in Montage. It is managed through the same local version of the WCStools 
                      library used to manage HEALPix data. The WWT consumes PNG or JPEG files
                      organized and named to conform to the TOAST sky-tessellation scheme. 
                      Montage includes custom routines to organize TOAST files for display 
                      in the WWT. These modules are:


                       mHdrWWT: Create a TOAST tile header file given a tile ID (in Z-order 
                       digits such as"2320") and an output file name.


                       mHdrWWTExec: Recursively creates all the headers for an all-sky set 
                       using mHdrWWT.


                       mProjWWTExec: Runs mProjectQL to reproject an all-sky input image 
                       into a set of FITS tile images using the headers created by mHdrWWT 
                       and mHdrWWTExec . It writes all these into a directory, given an an 
                       argument.


                       mPNGWWTExe: Runs mViewer for each FITS file, using a pregenerated 
                       histogram and a color table given as arguments. The histogram is generated 
                       by mHistogram and can be based on one of the WWT image set or from the 
                       original image(s)from which the WWT images were derived.


4.0   30Sep2015    New modules to support working with data cubes :

                      mCubeProj -- Based on mProject, this new module allows
                      for three- and four-dimensional data files (and is easily
                      extended to more dimensions if we ever find data in that
                      form that needs to be projected). mCubeProj is for now
                      kept separate from mProject even though the spatial
                      code is identical to avoid slowing or introducing bugs
                      into that heavily-used module. We may merge them back
                      together in the future.

                      mCubeProj requires that the first two axes are spatial.
                      See mTranspose if the cube needs to be reorganized into
                      this form.

                      ---

                      mTranspose -- Dealing with reprojection and reselection
                      of axes at the same time is much more complicated than
                      either of those operations and makes the code much more
                      likely to harbor bugs. We have opted for requiring the
                      spatial dimensions to be the first two in the cube and
                      providing a "transpose" utility to allow reorganizing
                      files where this is not the case.

                      ---

                      mAddCube -- Coadds the reprojected cubes in an input
                      list to form an output mosaic with FITS header keywords specified
                      in a header file.

                      mSubCube -- Creates a subimage (or "cutout") of a FITS file
                      containing a data cube.

                      mShrinkCube -- Rescale the spatial dimension of a cube.
                      Resampling or even averaging in the third dimension is
                      not generally safe, so we do not attempt it.

                      ---

                      Library directory names have been changed to reflect
                      version numbers since most of these are outside packages
                      that can be replaced by the user if desired (e.g. to change
                      to a newer version of the WCS library if it has new
                      projections).

                      ---

                      Some modules (checkHdr.c, mAddExec.c,
                      mBgModel.c, mCoverageCheck.c, mDiff.c, mMakeImg.c, mProject.c,
                      mProjectPP.c, mPutHdr.c, mShrink.c, mSubimage.c) have been
                      modified slightly to avoid messages from newer versions of
                      compilers (especially on Mac OSX). No algorithmic
                      changes; mostly proper handling of returns, etc.

                      ---

                      We have augmented the "JPEG generator" with enough new
                      functionality that we are rebranding it as a new tool,
                      mViewer. mViewer support grayscale, pseudocolor and
                      full color (three image) rendering into JPEG or PNG files.
                      There are several overlays possible, including coordinate
                      grids (of any sort and number) catalog overlays (scaled
                      and colored symbols with several shapes), image metadata
                      outlines, labels and custom markers, and so on. mJPEG remains
                      in the distribution but we do not plan further development.
                      The JPEG files contain AVM tags that allow them to be ingested
                      into the World Wide Telescope.

                      This utility can be used standalone, in pipelines, or as
                      the basis of an interactive (AJAX GUI) interaction toolkit.
                      A beta version of the Python wrapper around mViewer has been included 
                      in the distribution.

                      ---

                      There have been minor updates to several other modules:
                      Image metadata collection for mImgtbl
                      occasionally ran into trouble with missing
                      or invalid WCS keywords. Changed to handle
                      more gracefully.

                      mBgModel had a realloc bug where it was point
                      to the wrong array index.

                      An optional parameter was added to mMakeHdr to
                      set a maximum number of pixels on an image side.
                      mOverlaps now checks to see if the image
                      metadata already has the image four corners
                      rather than (re)generating them.

                      mTblSort had a bug where an empty table would
                      loop forever.

                      Finally, there have been a few additions of minor tools
                      for which need arose:

                        mPad -- Pad a FITS image with null pixel regions
                        (e.g. so mViewer can have a border).

                        mExamine -- Return basic information on a image
                        and optionally on a cone region.



3.3   14Dec2010    Library directory names changed to reflect version numbers
                   since most of these are outside packages that can be 
                   replaced by the user if desired (e.g. to change to a newer
                   version of the WCS library if it has new projections).

                   The checkHdr() routine used by most programs to validate 
                   that the FITS header in the file being used has all the
                   necessary information (so we can give a more informative
                   message than that we get from the WCS library) has been
                   update to include more checks and better messages.

                   Several modules had to have a kludge added to get around
                   a closure problem with the WCS library:  For CAR projections
                   (and potentially other cylindrical projections), FITS headers
                   with really large CRPIX offsets (e.g. a large fraction of the
                   sky) had trouble with pix->sky->pix transformations.  This 
                   affected mMakeImg, mOverlaps, mProject, mSubimage, mSubset,
                   mTANHdr, and utilities such as mRotate.

                   A few modules had an option added to allow status messages
                   to go to a file rather than to stdout.  This is primarily
                   to support certain workflow environments (like ISI's Pegasus).

                   Also there is an include file (mNaN.h) that is used to
                   deal with inter-platform differences in not-a-number checking
                   and this has been made more robust.

                   mAdd and mAddExec had small update to better support MPI
                   use.  mBgExec and mProjExec had more extensive MPI additions.

                   mBgModel has an added parameter (-a) to force the use all 
                   the overlap fits (normally there are exclusion rules for
                   fits that have too small an area, etc.).  There was also
                   a small bug in the counting of the number of fits that
                   were to be used.

                   mCoverageCheck is more careful about WCS initialization,
                   particularly in cutout mode, for some projections going
                   back to the original FITS file rather than using the
                   nominal parameters pulled from it earlier.  Also, at one
                   point in the processing mCoverageCheck was using nominal
                   outside pixel edges (e.g. -0.5 to npix+0.5) rather than
                   the exact pixel min,max range even though this had been
                   determined.

                   All the pixels being blank in an mDiff run was changed
                   from an error to a warning to avoid causing higher-level
                   executives to exit.

                   mDiffExec was likewise changed to deal with the mDiff
                   warning properly and to add a "level only" mode to be passed
                   on the mFitplane (i.e. so that mFitPlane finds only the 
                   average difference between overlapping images and does not
                   fit a full plane).

                   mFitExec also need to allow "level only" and had minor
                   updates for MPI processing.

                   Finally, mFitplane was changed to support this "level only"
                   mode.

                   mImgtbl was changed to return the number of images found 
                   with "bad" WCS information.

                   mMakeHdr was extended to allow for padding the image header
                   created and to check for a greater variety of parameters
                   in the input table.

                   mMakeImage is more careful about supporting odder projections,
                   the poles, etc.

                   mProjectPP was modified to be more careful about checking
                   "offscale" status in a projection.

                   mPutHdr was modified to check that inviolate information
                   (basically BITPIX and NAXIS1,2) were not changed.  mPutHdr
                   is not meant to be used to correct a corrupted file, just
                   one where non-structural information in the header is
                   missing or incorrect.

                   mShrink had an option added to allow it to extract and work
                   with a single HDU in a multi-HDU FITS file.

                   mSubimage now includes a "shrink-wrap" mode to strip off 
                   blank pixels around the outside of the image.

                   mSubset was not handling tables correctly when the coordinate
                   system of the data and the command-line didn't match.

                   The interation mechanism in mTANHdr was a little too sensitive
                   and has been damped down a little.

                   mTblSort had a reverse sort option added.

                   Padding in mTileHdr was being added with the wrong sign.

                   A Galactic plane mosaic DAG generator (mDAGGalacticPlane)
                   was added to the grid/Pegasus utilities.  Also in that package,
                   mDAG was updated to the Pegasus DAX schema version 2.  There
                   were a few other changes to code in the same package.

                   mArchiveExec had a simple "restart" mechanism added and is more
                   robust regarding column names (e.g. "url" and "URL" are both
                   now valid).

                   mArchiveGet puts more work into parsing data URLs and dealing
                   with proxy servers.  mArchiveList also now deals with proxy
                   servers.

                   mExec, the wrapper executive that runs end-to-end mosaic
                   processing, has a number of additional options (many of them
                   about results markup).

                   mHdr has an extra option when dealing with 2MASS images
                   to ensure the inclusion of the proper MAGZP value in
                   the mosaic header. mHdr can make use of the remote object
                   name "lookup" service and has therefore also been updated
                   with proper URL proxy handling.

                   mJPEG is currently under active development (to support
                   overlays of various sorts) but already has additional 
                   functionality to allow it to deal with files with no
                   WCS, showing a compass rose, etc.

                   mPix2Coord can support HDU selection and both FITS and
                   "header file" data input.

                   There were several minor updates made to correct typos
                   or wording in error messsages, etc. or notes in the code.



3.2                Never released except as beta versions.  See 3.3 for 
                   changes to final state.



3.1   21Sep2007    The updates in this release center mostly around using
                   Montage via mExec.  The archive access to SDSS has been
                   brought up to DR6 and full flux calibration is now done.
                   A problem with CAR projection (which can have very large
                   offsets as they often refer back to lat=0, lon=0) has been
                   dealt with, and mExec itself has been made more robust
                   and the output more instructive.

                   A few other bug fixes and enhances were also made:
                   mJPEG can now make images with a simple compass 'rose'
                   (showing N and E directions) and can make images for
                   FITS files where there is no valid WCS.

                   mTANHdr was made more robust, especially in dealing with
                   projections like CAR (when it is far away from the 
                   equator) where there are some gross overall distortions
                   (in addition to the fine distortions that mTANHdr is
                   really meant to address).



3.0   05Jan2007    The core system has not been changed much, though
                   there have been some additions and numerous small
                   tweaks.  The main emphasis has been on solidifying
                   Montage use in a distributed Grid environment to
                   allow the building of large-scale mosaics from
                   2MASS, SDSS, and DPOSS.

                   New Core Modules:
                     + mConvert
                     + mDiffFitExec
                     + mHdrTbl
                     + mTblSort


                   New Utilities:
                     + mArchiveList
                     + mArchiveGet
                     + mArchiveExec 
                     + mBestImage
                     + mCatMap
                     + mExec
                     + mFixNaN
                     + mHdr
                     + mJPEG
                     + mPix2Coord
                     + mRotate

                   Grid tools for Globus, Pegasus included in "grid" subdirectory

                   Additional Changes:
                   + mAdd: 
                     bug fixes; added averaging mode options
                   + mAddExec: 
                     new module to create series of tiled mosaics, 
                       instead of one large output image (mAdd)
                   + mBgExec: 
                     Memory bug fixes; improved handling for images 
                     with no corrections 
                   + mBgModel: 
                     Improved error handling; increased default 
                     iterations to 10000
                   + mDiff:
                     Improved error handling; decreased required
                     pixel area to include in calculations to 0.333
                   + mMakeHdr:
                     Added flag (-p) to set pixel scale; improved 
                     error handling
                   + mMakeImg:
                     Added 'region' and 'replace' modes
                   + mOverlaps:
                     Increased diff file name range
                   + mProjExec:
                     Automatically use mProjectPP when possible; 
                     output message updates; added flux scaling option;
                     added support for 'hdu' column in image table
                   + mProject, mProjectPP:
                     Added flux scaling option; added weight image and
                     HDU functionality; added option to force reprojection
                     of whole image, even if part of it is outside
                     region of interest
                   + mShrink:
                     Added "fixed size" mode
                   + mTANHdr:
                     Scaling/rotation now inherited from input header; 
                     increased number of points used in fit; check fit
                     for "all off-scale" condition; performance improvements

2.2   20Jul2004    Makefiles have been updated and the CFITSIO
                   library modified (see docs/ExternalLibraries.txt
                   for details) to allow the use of 64-bit addressing
                   (files larger than 2 GByte) on LINUX platforms.

2.1   01Jul2004    Changes have been made to several modules.
                   The biggest change, however, is the addition
                   of mTANHdr (and associated changed to mProjectPP)
                   which allow the fast reprojection of non-tangent-plane
                   projections if they can be approximated as distorted
                   TAN images.

2.0.4 16Mar2004    mAdd no longer allocates the entire output 
                   image up front, and so uses even less memory.
                   -level-only flag has been added to mBgModel.

                   New module mShrink added to make scaled 
                   versions of an image (e.g. image with pixel
                   scale 5.5 times larger than the original)

                   New modules mRadHit and mRadHitExec added
                   to try and remove "radiation hit" type 
                   artifacts from original unprojected images
                   by comparing pixel values to local medians.

                   New modules mDagTbls and mConcatFit added to
                   aid in GRID computing use of Montage.  The 
                   first generates a set of tables (lists of 
                   images, overlap analysis) for use in setting
                   up a batch processing run.  The second combines
                   the output of difference fitting (presumably
                   in this context done via separate threads) into
                   a single table for use by mBgModel.

2.0.3 04Feb2004    mAdd has been updated to better manage memory 
                   and a fast reprojection (plane-to-plane) module
                   has been added (mProjectPP).

2.0.2 13Jan2004    Fixed several problems with 'boundaries' library
                   (used by mMakeHdr). Also fixed a realloc() bug
                   in mMakeHdr.

2.0.1 25Nov2003    Fixed background matching (specifically mDiff
                   bug) and made various other minor changes.

2.0   17Sep2003    Status file option added to all modules
                   to support GRID (Montage-G DAG) processing.


                   Migrated from Montage 1.7.1:

                   Fixed a couple of bugs in mProject: FITS 
                   reading was being done incorrectly (which 
                   caused occassional error conditions) and 
                   pixel "handedness" was sometime computed 
                   incorrectly for CD matrices.

1.7   29May2003    - Added checks for malloc return values in mAdd
                   - mBgModel now allows arbitrarily large 
                     number of iterations

1.6   24Apr2003    Support for DSS projection has been added.
                   All anomaly reports from 1.5 have been 
                   resolved.  Specifically:
                   - checkHdr.c is more robust (and handles DSS
                     headers properly
                   - checkWCS.c handles transposed lon/lat
                   - Minor changes to mImgtbl support routines
                   - mImgtbl checks for correct ordering of corners
                   - Added checks to see if template file lines
                     contained <CR><LF> syntax (ie, had been passed
                     through a PC)
                   - Added checks for svc_run() aborts due to a 
                     missing executable (eg if the mProjExec
                     executable existed but mProject didn't)
                   - Fixed bug in mGetHdr where it checked the
                     wrong argument for FITS header
                   - mHdrCheck now checks explicitly for a
                     missing input file
                   - Added specific checks to mProjExec to see if
                     the various files and directories on the command
                     line exist before calling mProject
                   - Fixed bugs in syntax for parsing -i and -o
                     arguments in mProject
                   - Added more debugging messages to mProject                  

1.5   18Mar2003    All anomoly reports have been resolved
                   and getopt() processing has been incorporated
                   into most of the modules to handle command-line
                   parameters.

1.4   24Jan2003    The background rectification software
                   has been debugged and modified slightly.
                   Minor modifications have also been made
                   to the reprojection code to avoid problems
                   with small-offset roundoff errors 
                   affecting the pixel overlap calculations.

1.3    1Oct2002    Workaround for bug in WCS library
                   affecting cylindrical projections;
                   fix for LINUX bug in svc control
                   library

1.2   25Sep2002    Initial LINUX port

1.1   27Jul2002    Updated pixel overlap to remove
                   repeated (within positional tolerance)
                   points.  Otherwise the Girard() 
                   calculation gets confused.

1.0   01Jul2002    Initial Limited Release
